LVLM-MPC Collaboration for Autonomous
Driving: A Safety-Aware and Task-Scalable Control
Architecture
1st Kazuki Atsuta
Department of Mechanical Systems Engineering
Nagoya University
Nagoya, Japan
atsuta.kazuki.j6@s.mail.nagoya-u.ac.jp
2nd Kohei Honda
Department of Mechanical Systems Engineering
Nagoya University
Nagoya, Japan
honda.kohei.k3@f.mail.nagoya-u.ac.jp
3rd Hiroyuki Okuda
Department of Mechanical Systems Engineering
Nagoya University
Nagoya, Japan
h okuda@nuem.nagoya-u.ac.jp
4th Tatsuya Suzuki
Department of Mechanical Systems Engineering
Nagoya University
Nagoya, Japan
t suzuki@nuem.nagoya-u.ac.jp
Abstract—This paper proposes a novel Large Vision-Language
Model (LVLM) and Model Predictive Control (MPC) integration
framework that delivers both task scalability and safety for
Autonomous Driving (AD). LVLMs excel at high-level task
planning across diverse driving scenarios. However, since these
foundation models are not specifically designed for driving and
their reasoning is not consistent with the feasibility of low-
level motion planning, concerns remain regarding safety and
smooth task switching. This paper integrates LVLMs with MPC
Builder, which automatically generates MPCs on demand, based
on symbolic task commands generated by the LVLM, while
ensuring optimality and safety. The generated MPCs can strongly
assist the execution or rejection of LVLM-driven task switching
by providing feedback on the feasibility of the given tasks and
generating task-switching-aware MPCs. Our approach provides
a safe, flexible, and adaptable control framework, bridging the
gap between cutting-edge foundation models and reliable vehicle
operation. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach
through a simulation experiment, showing that our system can
safely and effectively handle highway driving while maintaining
the flexibility and adaptability of LVLMs.
Index Terms—Autonomous Driving, Foundation Model, Model
Predictive Control
I. INTRODUCTION
Imagine a human driver weaving through heavy traffic on a
congested road. They read overhead signs, anticipate merges
and splits, and select an optimal lane well in advance, while
fine-tuning steering, throttle, and brake inputs to perform
various driving subtasks. This seamless blend of long-horizon
task planning and real-time motion control is essential for
autonomous driving (AD). To bridge this semantic control
gap, we propose a hierarchical LVLM-MPC architecture in
which a Large Vision-Language Model (LVLM) [1] produces
symbolic task commands from visual and linguistic cues, and
MPC
MPC w/
Feasibility Check
LVLM
as a 
Task 
Planner 
(a)
(b)
(ours)
MPC Builder
MPC 
Composer
Intelligent MPC Switch 
w/ Feasibility Check
Rejection Flag
Task Cmd.
Task Cmd.
OCP
Motion Planning
Rejection Flag
Environment
Task
Cmd.
Control
Input
OCP Memory
OCP:
Feasible,
Cooperative
with LVLM
OCP: Feasible
MPC Solver
Fig. 1: Conceptual comparison of hierarchical LVLM-MPC
pipelines. (a) A unidirectional LVLM-to-MPC chain either
executes tasks or stalls; (b) a bidirectional variant merely
returns a binary infeasibility flag; (ours) a feedback loop, pow-
ered by MPC Builder, assembles task-specific Optimal Control
Problems (OCPs) and synthesizes safe recovery maneuvers,
enabling seamless task–motion handovers.
a Model Predictive Controller (MPC) executes them under
dynamic constraints, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
Although similar hierarchical frameworks have been stud-
ied, two key challenges remain unaddressed. The first chal-
lenge is the limited scalability of conventional model-based
planners such as MPC when paired with the open-ended
task space generated by modern LVLMs. Most model-based
controllers are hand-crafted for a small set of tasks, which
restricts their versatility. Expanding their capability typically
requires either switching among multiple controllers [2] or
formulating a large multi-objective optimization problem [3].
As the number of tasks grows, the design and verification ef-
arXiv:2505.04980v2  [cs.RO]  15 Jul 2025
fort increases exponentially, which is a severe drawback when
combined with an LVLM that can output diverse instructions.
The second challenge concerns communication when a re-
quested task is temporarily infeasible. Many prior works adopt
a unidirectional pipeline (Fig. 1(a)): the LVLM issues a high-
level command, and the MPC either succeeds or fails silently,
compromising task–motion consistency [4], [5]. Some meth-
ods let the MPC return a binary infeasible flag (Fig. 1(b)) [6].
However, a lone flag can leave the vehicle trapped in a
state where the LVLM’s proposal remains infeasible, forcing
repeated re-planning, deadlocks, and wasted computation.
To address these challenges, we integrate LVLM-based
planning with MPC-based execution through MPC Builder [7],
as depicted in Fig. 1. MPC Builder overcomes scalability by
automatically synthesizing MPCs from a compact library of
primitive design elements, enabling rapid adaptation to diverse
environments and complex tasks. For infeasible tasks, it not
only rejects the command but also constructs an alternative
optimal control problem that drives the system toward a
feasible
state,
thereby
assisting
smooth
task
switching.
Consequently, MPC Builder both facilitates successive task
handovers from the LVLM and guarantees feasibility and
safety during execution.
We validate the framework in highway-traffic simulations
with multiple surrounding vehicles. Baseline methods in
Fig. 1(a) and (b) frequently violate safety constraints and
suffer deadlocks. In contrast, our approach attains a 100%
success rate in safely navigating the scenario through tight
LVLM–MPC cooperation. Moreover, whereas the baselines
rely heavily on prompt engineering, our method maintains
robust safety without task-specific safety prompts, thanks to
MPC Builder’s inherent safe task-switching assistance.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Language-model-based Task and Motion Planning for AD
AD must accomplish an enormous variety of driving tasks,
and their probability distribution exhibits a long tail [8], mean-
ing that many scenarios occur with low frequency. Therefore,
achieving general-purpose AD is beyond the scope of scenario-
specific methods such as rule-based methods [9], imitation
learning [10], or reinforcement learning approaches [11].
To address this challenge, the recent dramatic performance
gains of language models such as large language mod-
els (LLMs) and LVLMs have spurred intensive research into
their incorporation into autonomous driving [12], [13]. Thanks
to their reasoning, interpretability, knowledge, and memory
capabilities, LLMs and LVLMs are expected to handle long-
tail corner cases at a human level [14], drawing attention
to their potential as versatile, closed-loop task planners for
planning and decision making. Several studies propose end-to-
end methods in which an LLM directly outputs waypoints or
control inputs [15]–[17]. However, such methods can generate
actions that violate vehicle kinematics or dynamics, thus
failing to guarantee safety. Moreover, the response latency of
large-scale models is far greater than the control cycle required
for autonomous driving, posing a significant barrier to real-
time deployment.
To enhance safety and improve real-time performance, some
studies adopt a two-layer approach in which an LLM serves as
a high-level decision maker, with a high-frequency lower-level
planner executing control [14], [18], [19]. Specifically, MPC
is often employed as the lower-level motion-planning method
in such architectures [4], [6], [20]. However, as noted in the
Introduction, these approaches do not address the scalability
limitations of the motion planner itself.
B. Motion Planning and Safety Assurance along with Lan-
guage Models
Language models have been applied to planning diverse,
long-horizon tasks in robotics [21], and many approaches—
such
as
[22],
[23]—adopt
the
two-layer
architecture
combining an LLM with a motion planner, achieving notable
success. Autonomous driving similarly demands long-horizon
planning and adaptability to varied environments, making it
a promising application domain; however, the stringent safety
requirements pose significant challenges.
Several mechanisms have been proposed to mitigate the
lack of safety awareness when using an LLM as a task
planner. Some studies passively guarantee safety by outputting
control inputs that satisfy control-barrier functions [5], [24].
Nonetheless, because these methods do not provide the LLM
with feasibility feedback or active replanning based on the
lower-level planner’s results, overall safety remains dependent
on the quality of the LLM’s plans.
Wang et al. combine LLM-based task planning with MPC-
based motion planning. Similar to our approach, they feed
feasibility information from the MPC back to the LLM,
enabling the LLM to generate safer task plans [6]. However,
since the LLM operates at a lower frequency than the MPC,
plans deemed optimal by the LLM may be rejected due to
infeasibility at the initial condition of each planning step,
resulting in inefficiency. In contrast, our proposed method
addresses this trade-off by combining passive assistance for
executing tasks planned by the LVLM with active rejection
feedback, thereby aiming to achieve both planning efficiency
and safety.
III. REVIEW OF MPC BUILDER
This
study
integrates
our
previously
proposed
MPC
Builder [7] with the LVLM-based task planner. First, we
provide a brief overview of MPC Builder, which is a method
for generating Optimal Control Problems (OCPs) for a given
task.
The objective of MPC Builder is to execute various tasks
by automatically generating the corresponding OCP Ot at
time t defined as:
Find: ˆx(k|t) ∈X ⊂Rn, ∀k ∈{1, . . . , N},
(1)
ˆu(k|t) ∈U ⊂Rm, ∀k ∈{0, . . . , N −1},
(2)
Min.: J0:N =
N
X
k=0
Jk
 ˆx(k|t), ˆu(k|t)

,
(3)
MPC Builder
Primitive
Assigner
MPC
Composer
LVLM
MPC Solver
(MPPI)
MPC Switcher
w/ iOCP
MPC Primitive
Pool
𝒪!,#$%&'#
𝒪!,()*+'
Primitive Set
𝑃
Feasibility Feedback of 𝑇
𝑥,-&
𝑥#.#
Task
Cmd.
𝑇
OCP
Memory
𝒪!,/%'+
Context 
Memory
Task Set 𝒯
Control
Input
Predictive
State
Prompt
Template
Observation
Fig. 2: System overview of the proposed method. The orange section denotes LVLM-based task planning (Section IV-B). The
blue section shows OCP generation, feasibility checking, and MPC switching by MPC Builder (Section IV-D). MPC Builder
returns feasibility feedback to the LVLM, and the OCP it produces is guaranteed feasible and is safely executed by the MPC
solver to compute vehicle control inputs.
S.t.: ˆx(0|t) = x(t),
(4)
ˆx(k + 1|t) = ˆx(k|t) + f
 ˆx(k|t), ˆu(k|t)

∆τ,
(5)
g0:N
 ˆx(k|t), ˆu(k|t)

≤0, h0:N
 ˆx(k|t), ˆu(k|t)

= 0,
(6)
where the predicted values ˆx and ˆu are the predicted state and
control-input vectors. X and U denote the state and control
spaces, respectively. N and ∆τ are the length and time
intervals of the prediction horizon, respectively. J0:N is the
cost function that is minimized. f is a state-prediction function
that represents the dynamics of the control target. g0:N and
h0:N
are vectors of inequality and equality constraints,
respectively. ng and nh are the numbers of inequality and
equality constraints, respectively.
The idea of MPC Builder is to combine MPC primitives,
which are the basic components of the OCP. The definition of
MPC primitives is as follows:
P =
 X, f, J0:N, g0:N, h0:N

,
(7)
where it is assumed that all MPC primitives share a common
input space U. The MPC primitives are designed to be reusable
and represent subtasks or control requirements, such as ve-
hicle dynamics, lateral/longitudinal driving tasks, and safety
requirements for surrounding agents, as listed in Table I.
MPC Builder generates the OCP Ot at time t by combining
the MPC primitives in P as follows:
Ot =
 U,
M
X
i=1
Pi

=
 U, ((P1 ⊕P2) ⊕· · · ) ⊕PM

,
(8)
where Pi is the i-th MPC primitive, and M is the number
of MPC primitives. The operator ⊕combines two MPC
primitives as
Pi ⊕Pj =
 X, f, J0:N, g0:N, h0:N

,
(9)
X = Xi × Xj, f = fi × fj, J0:N = Ji
0:N + Jj
0:N,
g0:N = gi
0:N × gj
0:N, h0:N = hi
0:N × hj
0:N.
The strength of MPC Builder lies in its capability to
represent various time-varying driving tasks in real time by
composing a small number of MPC primitives. As a result,
compared with designing individual MPCs for every possible
driving task and environmental configuration, MPC Builder
generates MPCs with fewer design elements and reduces
engineering effort. However, the previous study [7] selected
the required MPC primitives at each time step using a rule-
based approach, which did not consider the context of the
environment or the driving task.
IV. LVLM MEETS MPC BUILDER
In this paper, we integrate the LVLM-based task planner
with MPC Builder to achieve various and flexible driving
tasks while considering MPC-based costs, safety, and dynamic
feasibility.
A. System Overview
Figure 2 shows the system overview of the proposed
framework, which is a hierarchical structure consisting of two
layers: the LVLM-based task planner and MPC Builder. The
LVLM plans the target driving task based on the observed
environmental information and passes the task command T
to MPC Builder. The task command T is assumed to be
a symbolic representation of the driving task, such as in
(11). Based on the task command and the observation, MPC
Builder generates a feasible OCP Osolve, which is solved by
an optimization solver in real time.
The LVLM task planner and MPC Builder can run
separately.
This
works
because
the
MPC
Builder
can
keep doing its current task, even when it doesn’t get new
instructions from the LVLM. In contrast, the LVLM operates
with low frequency, and it is difficult to issue task commands
within the vehicle’s control cycle.
Template for 𝒙𝐭𝐱𝐭
System prompt:
Memory of conversations: 
Human prompt: 
•
Overview of the environment.
•
{ Task set 𝓣}
•
Explanation of the observed values
and the image
•
Safety instructions
•
{ Feasibility feedback on previous task }
•
{ The observed values }
•
Specification of output format
+ “Let’s think step by step.” (CoT)
{     }
Template for 𝒙𝐢𝐦𝐠
{ BEV of the previous step }
{ BEV of the current step }
Fig. 3: Template for generating text-and-image prompts to the
LVLM.
Algorithm 1 Intermediate OCP between two OCPs
Input: Coefficients of the penalty functions, ρg and ρh
1: function IOCP(OA, OB)
2:
▷OA = Ot,prev, OB = Ot,target in this paper
3:
(U, XA, fA, JA
0:N, gA
0:N, hA
0:N) ←OA
4:
(U, XB, fB, JB
0:N, gB
0:N, hB
0:N) ←OB
5:
XAB ←XA × XB
▷cartesian product of state space
6:
xAB ←(xA, xB) ∈XAB; u ∈U
7:
fAB(xAB, u) = (fA(xA, u), fB(xB, u))
8:
▷extend state prediction function
9:
Pk(xB
k , u) = ρg max{0, gB
k (xB
k , u)}2 + ρh
hB
k (xB
k , u)
2
10:
▷define penalty function from constrains of OB
11:
JAB
0:N(xAB, u) = JA
0:N(xA, u) + PN−1
k=0 Pk(xk
B, u)
12:
▷add penalty to cost function of OA
13:
gAB
0:N(xAB, u) = gA
0:N(xA, u)
14:
▷same inequality constrants as OB
15:
hAB
0:N(xAB, u) = hA
0:N(xA, u)
16:
▷same equality constrants as OA
17:
OAB ←(U, XAB, fAB, JAB, gAB, hAB)
18: return OAB
B. LVLM-based Task Planning with Feasibility Feedback
The LVLM reasons the task command from the bird’s-eye-
view (BEV) image and text prompt (ximg, xtxt) to reflect the
driving situation and user intent. The text prompt includes
system and heuristic human instructions, such as sensor obser-
vation, the format of the task command, and safety instructions
to consider the surrounding traffic, as shown in Fig. 3. We
also use prompt techniques to improve LVLM performance,
specifically zero-shot Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompting [25]
and in-context learning [26] with context memory to store past
reasoning and task-planning results.
Although the LVLM can generate a task command based
on the current context, the command may not always be
feasible in the physical environment, i.e., the generated OCP
may be infeasible. To reduce such flaws, we provide a binary
feasibility flag to the LVLM from the MPC Builder. The
feasibility check in MPC Builder is described in Section IV-D.
C. Smooth Task Switching using Intermediate OCP
As described in Section IV-B, the LVLM-based task planner
evaluates feasibility via feedback from MPC Builder; however,
it alone cannot guarantee that the generated task command
OCP(prev)
𝒪!,#$%&
iOCP 𝒪!,#$%&, 𝒪!,'($)%'
OCP(target)
𝒪!,'($)%'
Fig. 4: Transition from OCP(prev) to OCP(target) via the
iOCP. If Ot,target is absolutely infeasible, the transition is
abandoned, and the iOCP reverts to the safe Ot,prev.
will be feasible. If MPC Builder simply rejects an infeasible
command, the rejection may hinder the LVLM’s long-term
reasoning and potentially lead to a deadlock.
To address this issue, we introduce the intermediate OCP
(iOCP) [27] to facilitate smooth task transitions within MPC
Builder. When the OCP changes owing to a new task command
or traffic condition, MPC Builder generates a new iOCP to
assist the transition from the previous OCP to the new one,
as shown in Fig. 4. The specific process is described in
Algorithm 1. In this algorithm, the iOCP is defined from
the previous OCP Ot,prev and the new OCP Ot,target as
iOCP(Ot,prev, Ot,target). Here, the iOCP has the Cartesian
product of the state spaces and dynamics of Ot,prev and
Ot,target, and the constraints of Ot,prev are retained. The
cost function of the iOCP is defined as the sum of the cost
functions of Ot,prev and Ot,target, plus a penalty function for
the constraints of Ot,target.
Consequently, the iOCP guides the ego vehicle’s state
toward the feasible region of the target task command while
ensuring the feasibility of the previous OCP. Note that the
iOCP requires no additional design elements other than the
penalty coefficients ρg and ρh.
D. OCP Generation, Feasibility Check, and MPC Switching
in MPC Builder
We finally highlight the pipeline of MPC Builder, which
generates the OCP based on the task command and observa-
tion. As shown in Fig. 2, a module called Primitive Assigner
selects the necessary MPC primitive set P = {P1, . . . , PM}
from the MPC Primitive Pool according to the task command
and surrounding traffic. In the highway-driving experiment in
this paper, we use a simple rule-based approach for assigning
MPC primitives, as described in Section V-A and listed in
Table I. The MPC Composer generates a target OCP Ot,target
from the selected primitive set P at time t based on (8).
As mentioned in Section IV-B, MPC Builder checks the
feasibility of Ot,target and provides feedback to the LVLM.
The MPC Switcher verifies feasibility using the control-input
sequence optimized in the previous step, {ˆu(k|t −1) | k ∈
{1, . . . , N −1}}, as follows:
Ot,task is feasible ⇐
∀k ∈{0, N −2}

ˆx(0|t) = x(t) ∧
ˆx(k+1|t) = ˆx(k|t) + f(ˆx(k|t), ˆu(k+1|t −1))∆τ ∧
gk(ˆx(k|t), ˆu(k+1|t −1)) ≤0 ∧
hk(ˆx(k|t), ˆu(k+1|t −1)) = 0

.
(10)
Algorithm 2 MPC Switcher
Input: The OCP from the previous time step, Ot,prev, the consec-
utive execution count of iOCP, niOCP, and the upper limit of
niOCP, nmax
1: function MPC SWITCHER(Ot,task)
2:
if Ot,task is feasible :
3:
Ot,solve ←Ot,task
4:
Ot,prev ←Ot,task
5:
niOCP ←0
6:
is rejected ←False
7:
else
8:
if niOCP < nmax :
9:
Ot,solve ←iOCP(Ot,prev, Ot,task)
10:
niOCP ←niOCP + 1
11:
is rejected ←False
12:
else
13:
Ot,solve ←Ot,prev
14:
niOCP ←0
15:
is rejected ←True
16: return Ot,solve, is rejected
Although this feasibility check is based on the previous
predictive states and is not a strict condition, it is a practical
way to assess feasibility and has not caused any issues in our
experiments.
The MPC Switcher then generates an iOCP if Ot,target is
infeasible, assisting the transition as described in Section IV-C.
The OCP to be solved, denoted as Ot,solve, is output by the
MPC Switcher, which functions according to Algorithm 2. We
set an upper limit nmax on consecutive iOCP selections to
prevent the system from being trapped in an iOCP. If niOCP >
nmax, MPC Builder rejects the task switch, reverts to Oprev,
and marks the task command infeasible, as indicated in Fig. 4.
Because the constraints of the iOCP and previous OCP are the
same, this reversion is guaranteed to be feasible. This decision
is indicated as is rejected in Algorithm 2, and is also fed back
to the LVLM as a rejection.
As a result, MPC Builder generates a feasible OCP Ot,solve
even when the task command is infeasible. Moreover, we
achieve smooth and continuous task switching, although the
LVLM’s task planning is coarse and asynchronous.
V. EXPERIMENTS
To demonstrate the safety-assurance mechanism of the
proposed framework, we conducted numerical experiments
in a simulated driving environment, where the ego vehicle
drives in a congested three-lane highway scenario based on
the HighwayEnv simulator [28].
A. Experimental Setup
We use the GPT-4o model [1] as the LVLM. Since we access
the model through the OpenAI API and the delay time is not
reproducible, we implemented a synchronous process to pause
the simulation until the LVLM produced a response.
In the highway-driving scenario, we feed the following
instruction in the user-instruction part of the text prompt
(Fig. 3): i.e., “You should now act as a mature driving assistant
who can give accurate and correct advice for a human driver
in complex highway driving scenarios. The passengers say,
”I’m in a hurry.”” This prompt encourages the LVLM to
weave through the congested road by lane changing.
As described in Section IV-B, the LVLM generates a task
command T. Specifically, the LVLM outputs a symbolic
command T that indicates the desired driving task as
T = {LANE_LEFT, IDLE, LANE_RIGHT}.
(11)
As the MPC Builder, we implemented six MPC primitives
to
execute
the
task
commands
and
ensure
safety
for
surrounding vehicles, as shown in Table I. While our
implementation focuses on the highway-driving scenario, the
MPC Builder framework has been validated across multiple
scenarios in [7], showing its potential applicability to diverse
tasks and environments.
The Primitive Assigner selects a lateral task primitive based
on the task command T
∈T received from the LVLM.
It selects a longitudinal task primitive between Constant
Speed (CS) and Adaptive Cruise Control (ACC) using a simple
rule; CS is chosen when the leading vehicle is located far
ahead of the ego vehicle, whereas ACC is chosen when the
leading vehicle is as close as 2dacc [m] to the ego vehicle.
For safety primitives corresponding to surrounding vehicles,
all vehicles in the vicinity of the ego vehicle are selected, up
to a maximum of six.
Regarding the MPC solver, to improve numerical stability,
we adopted the sample-based method MPPI [29] instead of the
C/GMRES method used in [7]. Because constraints cannot be
handled as hard constraints, the cost function Ck provided to
MPPI incorporates the constraint functions as penalty terms:
Ck(ˆx, ˆu) = Jk(ˆx, ˆu) + µ(1[gk(ˆx, ˆu) > 0] + 1[hk(ˆx, ˆu) ̸= 0]) ,
(12)
where 1[·] is an indicator function that returns 1 if the given
proposition is true and 0 otherwise. The coefficient µ is set to
a sufficiently large value (µ = 100) to treat the constraints
as approximately hard constraints in this experiment. The
prediction horizon is configured with N = 20 steps. The time
step is set as ∆τ = 0.05 s. The control input is defined as
u = (a, δ) ∈U, where a represents acceleration and δ the
steering angle. The variances for input sampling used in MPPI
are set to 2.0 and 0.01 for acceleration and steering angle,
respectively.
B. Evaluation Setup
To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed bidirectional
communication framework between the LVLM and MPC
Builder, we compare the proposed method, called LVLM-
MPCBuilder, with two baseline methods:
• LVLM2MPC executes the tasks planned by the LVLM
directly by solving the target OCP generated by the
MPC Builder without iOCP assistance. No feasibility
feedback is sent to the LVLM, resulting in strictly one-
way communication. This baseline is similar to [4].
TABLE I: Formulations of MPC primitives
Type
name
X
J0:N
f
g0:N
h
Ego Dynamics
KBM
Xego
0
fKBM
∅
∅
LK
∅
{∥y∥2 + ∥θ∥2 + ∥˙θ∥2 + ∥δ∥2 + ∥˙δ∥2}Qlk
∅
[ymin −y, y −ymax, δmin −δ, δ −δmax]
∅
Lateral
Task
LC
∅
{∥y −yref∥2 + ∥θ∥2 + ∥˙θ∥2 + ∥δ∥2 + ∥˙δ∥2}Qlc
∅
[ymin −y, y −ymax, δmin −δ, δ −δmax,
dlc
safe −∥x −xpv∥]
∅
CS
∅
{∥v −vref∥2 + ∥a∥2 + ∥˙a∥2}Qcs
∅
[amin −a, a −amax]
∅
Longitudinal
Task
ACC
∅
{∥x −xpv −dacc∥2 + ∥a∥2 + ∥˙a∥2}Qacc
∅
[amin −a, a −amax, dacc
safe −∥x −xpv∥]
∅
Safety
PV
Xpv
0
fpv
[dpv
safe −
p
(x −xpv)2 + (y −ypv)2]
∅
1 KBM means kinematic bicycle models. Lane keep (LK) and lane change (LC) are in lateral task primitive. Constant speed (CS) and adaptive-cruise-control
(ACC) are in longitudinal task primitive. Parallel vehicle (PV) is safety primitive.
2 Xego is a state space of ego vehicle; Xego = [x, y, θ, v]. Here, (x, y, θ) is an ego vehicle pose. v, a, and δ are the ego vehicle’s speed, acceleration, and
tire steer angle. Xpv = [xpv, ypv, vpv
x , vpv
y ] is the state space of a parallel running vehicle where (xpv, ypv) and (vpv
x , vpv
y ) are position and velocity. fpv
is the constant velocity model. vref and yref are given the reference speed and the y-coordinate value of the lane center. dacc is a target relative distance
in ACC. Q∗represents the given weight coefficient vectors. (∗min, ∗max) and dsafe∗are given min./max. values and safety distances.
• LVLM2PID utilizes a PID controller built into High-
wayEnv to execute the tasks planned by the LVLM, which
decides a task command T from the command set
T ={LANE_LEFT, IDLE, LANE_RIGHT,
FASTER, SLOWER}.
(13)
LVLM2PID
also
sends
no
feasibility
feedback
to
the LVLM. In contrast to the proposed method and
LVLM2MPC, the PID controller does not perform trajec-
tory planning that accounts for safety constraints, similar
to [14], [18].
In all methods, including the proposed method, we use the
same text and image prompts for the LVLM. Note that
the prompt includes a safety instruction asking the LVLM
to maintain a safe distance dacc
safe from surrounding vehicles
during lane changes. For LVLM-MPCBuilder, every time the
LVLM performed a single task-planning step, MPC Builder
executed an additional 30 control steps beyond the iOCP
steps, and the maximum number of iOCP steps was set to
nmax = 50. For LVLM2PID, the LVLM carried out task
planning at a frequency of 1 Hz.
We utilize the following safety metrics to evaluate each
method:
• Success rate: the proportion of episodes that terminate
without collision.
• Safe lane-changing rate: the proportion of lane changes
that maintain the safety constraint of a distance of at least
dacc
safe from the preceding and following vehicles in the
target lane.
C. Simulation Results
1) Comparison with Baseline Methods: Table II summa-
rizes the quantitative evaluation results with 30 randomly
generated initial positions of the ego vehicle and surrounding
vehicles during the 50 s simulation time.
As shown in Table II, the baseline method LVLM2PID
exhibits lower success rates than the other methods because
it does not perform trajectory planning that accounts for
safety constraints. Although the prompt includes the safety
instruction to maintain a safe distance dacc from leading
MPC Builder assists the lane change planned by LVLM.
Task Cmd.:      0   →LANE_RIGHT,        4   → IDLE.        Ego,   Others. 
MPC Builder rejects the unsafe lane change planned by LVLM.
Fig. 5: In LVLM-MPCBuilder, MPC Builder assists or rejects
task plans generated by the LVLM that violate safety con-
straints, thereby ensuring safety.
vehicles, LVLM2PID often collides with leading vehicles,
resulting in a low success rate. This indicates that the LVLM
does not reliably enforce quantitative constraints, highlighting
the necessity of hard-constraint enforcement by the motion
planner.
In contrast, the proposed LVLM-MPCBuilder demonstrates
both a success rate of 100% and a safe lane-changing rate
of 100%, indicating that the proposed method successfully
ensures safety throughout the simulation. Among the 133 lane-
change decisions made by the LVLM, 9 lane changes were
assisted or rejected by the iOCP through feasibility checking
and state guidance. Hence, only (133−9)/133 = 93.2% of the
lane changes decided by the LVLM satisfied the safety con-
straints at the moment of decision, indicating that the LVLM
does not strictly obey the safety instructions in the prompt.
Indeed, in LVLM2MPC, which omits feasibility feedback and
iOCP-based task switching, the safe lane-changing rate drops
to 94.8%, and a dangerous, near-miss lane change caused the
following vehicle to decelerate, as shown in Fig. 6.
Figure 5 shows example trajectories in the simulation using
LVLM-MPCBuilder. Our method assisted LVLM-based lane
changes via the iOCP, which could make the lane change
feasible by adjusting the ego vehicle’s speed and steering
angle. MPC Builder sometimes rejected the LVLM’s decision
and fed the infeasibility back to the LVLM, as described in
Section IV-D.
TABLE II: Comparison of experimental results between the
baseline methods and the proposed method.
LVLM2PID
No. of LVLM task planning steps
728
No. of lane change decisions
138
Success rate
4/30
Safe lane-changing rate [%]
91.3
LVLM2MPC
No. of LVLM task planning steps
860
No. of lane change decisions
134
Success rate
30/30
Safe lane-changing rate [%]
94.8
LVLM-MPCBuilder (Proposed Method)
No. of LVLM task planning steps
832
No. of lane change decisions
133
No. of lane changes assisted by MPC Builder
7
No. of lane changes rejected by MPC Builder
2
Success rate
30/30
Safe lane-changing rate [%]
100
Task Cmd.:      1   →LANE_LEFT.                                      Ego,   Others.  
Fig. 6: The LVLM’s reckless lane-change decision was exe-
cuted faithfully, causing the following vehicle to decelerate.
2) Ablation Study for the iOCP-based Task Switching:
We conducted an ablation study to evaluate the iOCP-based
task-switching assistance mechanism in the proposed method.
Figure 7 compares the ego-vehicle travel distances over all 30
episodes with and without iOCP assistance. Without iOCP as-
sistance, episodes cover shorter distances, resulting in a lower
average travel distance. This indicates that iOCP assistance
not only reduces iterative replanning by the LVLM but also
mitigates deadlocks caused by rejections without alternative
task plans. Indeed, without iOCP assistance there were 17
rejections, whereas with iOCP only two tasks were rejected
across all 30 episodes (Table II), suggesting that many reckless
task plans do not require outright rejection.
3) Ablation Study for the Safety Instruction in the Prompt:
We also conducted an ablation study to evaluate the robust-
ness of the proposed method against prompt engineering. In
this study, we omitted the Safety Instructions in the LVLM
prompt, which specify the safe distance dlc
safe for lane changes
described in Section V-A.
Table III summarizes the results of this ablation study.
The baseline methods, LVLM2PID and LVLM2MPC, exhibit
significant decreases in success rate and safe lane-changing
rate compared with the case that includes safety instructions.
An example collision from LVLM2MPC without safety in-
structions is shown in Fig. 8. This occurs because the LVLM’s
reckless lane-change decisions are executed directly by the
underlying MPC or PID controller, leading to a high likelihood
of collisions. In contrast, LVLM-MPCBuilder maintains a
success rate of 100% and a safe lane-changing rate of 100%
w/o Assist
Proposed Method
1250
1300
1350
1400
Ego-vehicle travel distance [m]
Fig. 7: Ablation study for iOCP-based task-switching assis-
tance. Comparison of ego-vehicle travel distances over all 30
episodes with and without iOCP assistance.
TABLE III: Ablation Study: Without Safety Instructions in the
Prompt.
LVLM2PID
∆success rate
-3/30
∆safe lane-changing rate [%]
-15.0
LVLM2MPC
∆success rate
-2/30
∆safe lane-changing rate [%]
-20.8
LVLM-MPCBuilder (Proposed Method)
No. of lane change decisions
158
No. of lane changes assisted by MPC Builder
52
No. of lane changes rejected by MPC Builder
10
∆success rate
0
∆safe lane-changing rate [%]
0
even without the safety instruction prompt, demonstrating that
the proposed method can ensure safety when the LVLM lacks
explicit knowledge of safety constraints.
VI. CONCLUSION
This paper proposes an AD planning framework that com-
bines LVLM-based task planning with MPC Builder-based
motion planning. Our approach leverages the strengths of both
components: the LVLM’s ability to generate high-level task
plans and the MPC Builder’s capability to produce safe and
task-scalable motion plans. Simulation experiments demon-
strated that the proposed method significantly improves safety
compared with baseline methods. Because MPC Builder offers
high scalability with respect to driving tasks and scenarios,
the proposed system has the potential to exploit the LVLM’s
versatility without loss of generality.
Our proposed method has several limitations. A primary
limitation is the latency of the LVLM. This not only poses
a challenge to real-time processing but may also impede im-
mediate responses to abrupt environmental changes. Another
limitation is the lack of a systematic method for tuning the
cost weights and penalty factors in the MPC. Although this is
an inherent challenge in OCPs themselves, the proper tuning
of these parameters becomes particularly difficult in complex
tasks and scenarios. As future work, we will validate the
Task Cmd.:      1   →LANE_LEFT.                                      Ego,   Others.  
Fig. 8: A collision resulting from a dangerous lane-change
decision by LVLM2MPC without safety-constraint knowledge.
framework under diverse and complex scenarios and conduct
real-world, real-time experiments to clarify and resolve the
challenges posed by these limitations.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Islam and O. M. Moushi, “GPT-4o: The cutting-edge advancement
in multimodal llm,” Authorea Preprints, 2024.
[2] Q. Wang, B. Ayalew, and T. Weiskircher, “Predictive maneuver planning
for an autonomous vehicle in public highway traffic,” IEEE Transactions
on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 1303–1315,
2018.
[3] C. Liu, S. Lee, S. Varnhagen, and H. E. Tseng, “Path planning for
autonomous vehicles using model predictive control,” in Intelligent
Vehicles Symposium.
IEEE, 2017, pp. 174–179.
[4] H. Sha, Y. Mu, Y. Jiang, L. Chen, C. Xu, P. Luo, S. E. Li,
M. Tomizuka, W. Zhan, and M. Ding, “Languagempc: Large language
models as decision makers for autonomous driving,” 2023. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.03026
[5] Z. Ma, Q. Sun, and T. Matsumaru, “Bidirectional planning for au-
tonomous driving framework with large language model,” Sensors,
vol. 24, no. 20, p. 6723, 2024.
[6] Y. Wang, R. Jiao, S. S. Zhan, C. Lang, C. Huang, Z. Wang, Z. Yang, and
Q. Zhu, “Empowering autonomous driving with large language models:
A safety perspective,” in ICLR 2024 Workshop on Large Language
Model Agents, 2024.
[7] K. Honda, H. Okuda, T. Suzuki, and A. Ito, “Mpc builder for au-
tonomous drive: Automatic generation of mpcs for motion planning and
control,” in Intelligent Vehicles Symposium.
IEEE, 2023, pp. 1–8.
[8] A. Jain, L. Del Pero, H. Grimmett, and P. Ondruska, “Autonomy
2.0: Why is self-driving always 5 years away?” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2107.08142, 2021.
[9] C. F. Choudhury and M. E. Ben-Akiva, “Modelling driving decisions:
a latent plan approach,” Transportmetrica A: Transport Science, vol. 9,
no. 6, pp. 546–566, 2013.
[10] D.-F. Xie, Z.-Z. Fang, B. Jia, and Z. He, “A data-driven lane-changing
model based on deep learning,” Transportation research part C: emerg-
ing technologies, vol. 106, pp. 41–60, 2019.
[11] F. Ye, X. Cheng, P. Wang, C.-Y. Chan, and J. Zhang, “Automated
lane change strategy using proximal policy optimization-based deep
reinforcement learning,” in Intelligent Vehicles Symposium. IEEE, 2020,
pp. 1746–1752.
[12] Z. Yang, X. Jia, H. Li, and J. Yan, “LLM4Drive: A survey of large
language models for autonomous driving,” in NeurIPS 2024 Workshop
on Open-World Agents, 2024.
[13] C. Cui, Y. Ma, X. Cao, W. Ye, Y. Zhou, K. Liang, J. Chen, J. Lu, Z. Yang,
K.-D. Liao et al., “A survey on multimodal large language models for
autonomous driving,” in IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp. 958–979.
[14] D. Fu, X. Li, L. Wen, M. Dou, P. Cai, B. Shi, and Y. Qiao, “Drive like
a human: Rethinking autonomous driving with large language models,”
in IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision
Workshops.
IEEE, 2024, pp. 910–919.
[15] H. Shao, Y. Hu, L. Wang, G. Song, S. L. Waslander, Y. Liu, and H. Li,
“LMDrive: Closed-loop end-to-end driving with large language models,”
in IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2024, pp. 15 120–15 130.
[16] J. Mao, Y. Qian, J. Ye, H. Zhao, and Y. Wang, “GPT-Driver: Learning
to drive with gpt,” in NeurIPS 2023 Foundation Models for Decision
Making Workshop, 2023.
[17] Z. Xu, Y. Zhang, E. Xie, Z. Zhao, Y. Guo, K.-Y. K. Wong, Z. Li, and
H. Zhao, “DriveGPT4: Interpretable end-to-end autonomous driving via
large language model,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2024.
[18] L. Wen, D. Fu, X. Li, X. Cai, T. MA, P. Cai, M. Dou, B. Shi, L. He, and
Y. Qiao, “DiLu: A knowledge-driven approach to autonomous driving
with large language models,” in The Twelfth International Conference
on Learning Representations, 2024.
[19] C. Cui, Y. Ma, X. Cao, W. Ye, and Z. Wang, “Receive, reason, and react:
Drive as you say, with large language models in autonomous vehicles,”
IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems Magazine, 2024.
[20] K. Long, H. Shi, J. Liu, and X. Li, “VLM-MPC: Vision language
foundation model -guided model predictive controller for autonomous
driving,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.04821, 2024.
[21] J. Wang, E. Shi, H. Hu, C. Ma, Y. Liu, X. Wang, Y. Yao, X. Liu, B. Ge,
and S. Zhang, “Large language models for robotics: Opportunities,
challenges, and perspectives,” Journal of Automation and Intelligence,
2024.
[22] J. Liang, W. Huang, F. Xia, P. Xu, K. Hausman, B. Ichter, P. Florence,
and A. Zeng, “Code as policies: Language model programs for embodied
control,” in IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation.
IEEE, 2023, pp. 9493–9500.
[23] W. Yu, N. Gileadi, C. Fu, S. Kirmani, K.-H. Lee, M. G. Arenas, H.-
T. L. Chiang, T. Erez, L. Hasenclever, J. Humplik et al., “Language to
rewards for robotic skill synthesis,” in Conference on Robot Learning.
PMLR, 2023, pp. 374–404.
[24] A. A. Khan, M. Andrev, M. A. Murtaza, S. Aguilera, R. Zhang, J. Ding,
S. Hutchinson, and A. Anwar, “Safety aware task planning via large
language models in robotics,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.15707, 2025.
[25] T. Kojima, S. S. Gu, M. Reid, Y. Matsuo, and Y. Iwasawa, “Large lan-
guage models are zero-shot reasoners,” Advances in neural information
processing systems, vol. 35, pp. 22 199–22 213, 2022.
[26] T. Brown, B. Mann, N. Ryder, M. Subbiah, J. D. Kaplan, P. Dhariwal,
A. Neelakantan, P. Shyam, G. Sastry, A. Askell et al., “Language mod-
els are few-shot learners,” Advances in neural information processing
systems, vol. 33, pp. 1877–1901, 2020.
[27] K. Honda, H. Okuda, T. Suzuki, and A. Ito, “Connection of nonlinear
model predictive controllers for smooth task switching in autonomous
driving,” Asian Journal of Control, vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 1805–1822, 2023.
[28] E. Leurent, “An environment for autonomous driving decision-making,”
https://github.com/eleurent/highway-env, 2018.
[29] G. Williams, P. Drews, B. Goldfain, J. M. Rehg, and E. A. Theodorou,
“Information-theoretic model predictive control: Theory and applications
to autonomous driving,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 34, no. 6,
pp. 1603–1622, 2018.
